README.md, before:

# Diffusion Policy for Robotic Manipulation

A PyTorch implementation of [Diffusion Policy](https://diffusion-policy.cs.columbia.edu/) using a Diffusion Transformer (DiT) architecture for robotic manipulation tasks in [robosuite](https://robosuite.ai/).

This implementation achieves **100% success rate** on the PickPlaceCan task and strong performance across multiple robosuite benchmarks.

## Results

Evaluation results on robosuite manipulation tasks:

| Task | Success Rate | Avg Reward | Avg Steps | Episodes |
|------|-------------|------------|-----------|----------|
| **Can (PickPlaceCan)** | **100%** | 32.88 | 162 | 50 |
| Lift | 75% | 33.16 | 193 | 20 |
| Square | 70% | 32.57 | 212 | 20 |

Evaluation videos are saved to `eval_videos/` when running evaluation with `--save-videos`.

## Architecture

This implementation uses a **Diffusion Transformer (DiT)** architecture inspired by [NVIDIA GROOT](https://nvidia.github.io/GROOT/). Key features:

- **DDPM** diffusion with cosine noise schedule
- **Cross-attention conditioning** on observations (all layers)
- **Multi-frame observation history** with learned temporal embeddings
- **AdaLN-Zero** output blocks for timestep conditioning

### Model Configuration

| Parameter | Value |
|-----------|-------|
| Hidden dimension | 512 |
| Transformer layers | 16 |
| Attention heads | 8 |
| Observation horizon | 4 frames |
| Action horizon | 16 steps |
| Diffusion steps | 100 |

For detailed ablation studies and experiment logs, see [EXPERIMENTS.md](EXPERIMENTS.md).

## Installation

**Requirements:** Python ≥ 3.12

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/your-username/diffusion-policy.git
cd diffusion-policy

# Install with uv (recommended)
uv sync

# Or with pip
pip install -e .
```

### Dataset Setup

This project uses demonstration data in [robomimic](https://robomimic.github.io/) HDF5 format. Download the datasets:

```bash
# Download robomimic datasets (requires robomimic installed)
python -m robomimic.scripts.download_datasets --tasks lift can square

# Convert to the required format (if needed)
python -m robomimic.scripts.conversion.convert_robosuite --dataset path/to/dataset.hdf5
```

Place the converted HDF5 files in the `data/` directory:
- `data/lift_converted.hdf5`
- `data/can_converted.hdf5`
- `data/square_converted.hdf5`

## Training

Train a diffusion policy on a robosuite task:

```bash
# Basic training
python main.py train --task can --data-path data/can_converted.hdf5 --epochs 100

# Full configuration
python main.py train \
    --task can \
    --data-path data/can_converted.hdf5 \
    --epochs 100 \
    --batch-size 32 \
    --lr 1e-4 \
    --hidden-dim 512 \
    --n-layers 16 \
    --obs-horizon 4 \
    --pred-horizon 16 \
    --checkpoint-dir checkpoints
```

### Training on Modal (Cloud GPUs)

For faster training on cloud GPUs via [Modal](https://modal.com/):

```bash
python main.py train --task can --data-path data/can_converted.hdf5 --modal
```

Checkpoints are saved to `checkpoints/policy_{task}_best.pt`.

## Evaluation

Evaluate a trained policy:

```bash
# Basic evaluation
python main.py evaluate --checkpoint checkpoints/policy_can_best.pt --task can --n-episodes 50

# With video recording
python main.py evaluate \
    --checkpoint checkpoints/policy_can_best.pt \
    --task can \
    --n-episodes 50 \
    --save-videos \
    --n-videos 5 \
    --video-dir eval_videos

# Enable debug logging
python main.py evaluate --checkpoint checkpoints/policy_can_best.pt --task can --debug
```

Evaluation metrics are saved to `eval_results/metrics.json`.

## Project Structure

```
diffusion-policy/
├── main.py              # CLI entry point (train/evaluate commands)
├── policy.py            # DiffusionPolicy and DiT model implementation
├── data/
│   ├── dataset.py       # RobomimicDataset loader and normalization
│   └── *.hdf5           # Demonstration data files
├── envs/
│   └── robosuite_wrapper.py  # Robosuite environment wrapper
├── eval/
│   └── evaluate.py      # PolicyEvaluator and metrics
├── train_modal.py       # Modal cloud training script
├── eval_modal.py        # Modal cloud evaluation script
├── EXPERIMENTS.md       # Detailed experiment logs and ablations
└── checkpoints/         # Saved model checkpoints
```

## Citation

If you use this code, please cite the original Diffusion Policy paper:

```bibtex
@inproceedings{chi2023diffusionpolicy,
    title={Diffusion Policy: Visuomotor Policy Learning via Action Diffusion},
    author={Chi, Cheng and Feng, Siyuan and Du, Yilun and Xu, Zhenjia and Cousineau, Eric and Burchfiel, Benjamin and Song, Shuran},
    booktitle={Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS)},
    year={2023}
}
```

## Acknowledgments

- [Diffusion Policy](https://diffusion-policy.cs.columbia.edu/) - Original paper and concept
- [robosuite](https://robosuite.ai/) - Simulation environments
- [robomimic](https://robomimic.github.io/) - Dataset format and benchmarks
- [Hugging Face Diffusers](https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers) - Diffusion model components

Commit message:

Update .gitignore to include new experiment files and enhance README with evaluation videos

README.md, after:

# Diffusion Policy for Robotic Manipulation

A PyTorch implementation of [Diffusion Policy](https://diffusion-policy.cs.columbia.edu/) using a Diffusion Transformer (DiT) architecture for robotic manipulation tasks in [robosuite](https://robosuite.ai/).

This implementation achieves **100% success rate** on the PickPlaceCan task and strong performance across multiple robosuite benchmarks.

## Results

Evaluation results on robosuite manipulation tasks:

| Task | Success Rate | Avg Reward | Avg Steps | Episodes |
|------|-------------|------------|-----------|----------|
| **Can (PickPlaceCan)** | **100%** | 32.88 | 162 | 50 |
| Lift | 75% | 33.16 | 193 | 20 |
| Square | 70% | 32.57 | 212 | 20 |

### Evaluation Videos

Successful rollouts from evaluation:

#### PickPlaceCan

#### Lift
![Lift](eval_videos/dit_lift/episode_0.mp4)

#### Square 


Evaluation videos are saved to `eval_videos/` when running evaluation with `--save-videos`.

## Architecture

This implementation uses a **Diffusion Transformer (DiT)** architecture inspired by [NVIDIA GROOT](https://github.com/NVIDIA/Isaac-GR00T). Key features:

- **DDPM** diffusion with cosine noise schedule
- **Cross-attention conditioning** on observations (all layers)
- **Multi-frame observation history** with learned temporal embeddings
- **AdaLN-Zero** output blocks for timestep conditioning

### Model Configuration

| Parameter | Value |
|-----------|-------|
| Hidden dimension | 512 |
| Transformer layers | 16 |
| Attention heads | 8 |
| Observation horizon | 4 frames |
| Action horizon | 16 steps |
| Diffusion steps | 100 |

For detailed ablation studies and experiment logs, see [EXPERIMENTS.md](EXPERIMENTS.md).

## Installation

**Requirements:** Python ≥ 3.12

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/your-username/diffusion-policy.git
cd diffusion-policy

# Install with uv (recommended)
uv sync

# Or with pip
pip install -e .
```

### Dataset Setup

This project uses demonstration data in [robomimic](https://robomimic.github.io/) HDF5 format. Download the datasets:

```bash
# Download robomimic datasets (requires robomimic installed)
python -m robomimic.scripts.download_datasets --tasks lift can square

# Convert to the required format (if needed)
python -m robomimic.scripts.conversion.convert_robosuite --dataset path/to/dataset.hdf5
```

Place the converted HDF5 files in the `data/` directory:
- `data/lift_converted.hdf5`
- `data/can_converted.hdf5`
- `data/square_converted.hdf5`

## Training

Train a diffusion policy on a robosuite task:

```bash
# Basic training
python main.py train --task can --data-path data/can_converted.hdf5 --epochs 100

# Full configuration
python main.py train \
    --task can \
    --data-path data/can_converted.hdf5 \
    --epochs 100 \
    --batch-size 32 \
    --lr 1e-4 \
    --hidden-dim 512 \
    --n-layers 16 \
    --obs-horizon 4 \
    --pred-horizon 16 \
    --checkpoint-dir checkpoints
```

### Training on Modal (Cloud GPUs)

For faster training on cloud GPUs via [Modal](https://modal.com/):

```bash
python main.py train --task can --data-path data/can_converted.hdf5 --modal
```

Checkpoints are saved to `checkpoints/policy_{task}_best.pt`.

## Evaluation

Evaluate a trained policy:

```bash
# Basic evaluation
python main.py evaluate --checkpoint checkpoints/policy_can_best.pt --task can --n-episodes 50

# With video recording
python main.py evaluate \
    --checkpoint checkpoints/policy_can_best.pt \
    --task can \
    --n-episodes 50 \
    --save-videos \
    --n-videos 5 \
    --video-dir eval_videos

# Enable debug logging
python main.py evaluate --checkpoint checkpoints/policy_can_best.pt --task can --debug
```

Evaluation metrics are saved to `eval_results/metrics.json`.

## Project Structure

```
diffusion-policy/
├── main.py              # CLI entry point (train/evaluate commands)
├── policy.py            # DiffusionPolicy and DiT model implementation
├── data/
│   ├── dataset.py       # RobomimicDataset loader and normalization
│   └── *.hdf5           # Demonstration data files
├── envs/
│   └── robosuite_wrapper.py  # Robosuite environment wrapper
├── eval/
│   └── evaluate.py      # PolicyEvaluator and metrics
├── train_modal.py       # Modal cloud training script
├── eval_modal.py        # Modal cloud evaluation script
├── EXPERIMENTS.md       # Detailed experiment logs and ablations
└── checkpoints/         # Saved model checkpoints
```

## Citation

If you use this code, please cite the original Diffusion Policy paper:

```bibtex
@inproceedings{chi2023diffusionpolicy,
    title={Diffusion Policy: Visuomotor Policy Learning via Action Diffusion},
    author={Chi, Cheng and Feng, Siyuan and Du, Yilun and Xu, Zhenjia and Cousineau, Eric and Burchfiel, Benjamin and Song, Shuran},
    booktitle={Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS)},
    year={2023}
}
```

## Acknowledgments

- [Diffusion Policy](https://diffusion-policy.cs.columbia.edu/) - Original paper and concept
- [robosuite](https://robosuite.ai/) - Simulation environments
- [robomimic](https://robomimic.github.io/) - Dataset format and benchmarks
- [Hugging Face Diffusers](https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers) - Diffusion model components
